---
layout: home
permalink: index.html

# Please update this with your repository name and title
repository-name: eYY-4yp-project-template
title:
---

[comment]: # "This is the standard layout for the project, but you can clean this and use your own template"

# Acceleration of deep neural network based nanopore super accuracy basecalling

#### Team

- E/17/012, R. A. A. U. Amarasinghe, [email](mailto:e17012@eng.pdn.ac.lk)
- E/17/201, W. T. Madushani, [email](mailto:e17201@eng.pdn.ac.lk)
- E/17/284, R. L. D. A. S. Rathnayaka, [email](mailto:e17284@eng.pdn.ac.lk)

#### Supervisors

- Prof. Roshan Ragel, [email](mailto:roshanr@eng.pdn.ac.lk)
- Dr. Damayanthi Herath, [email](mailto:damayanthiherath@eng.pdn.ac.lk)
- Dr. Hasindu Gamarachchi, [email](mailto:hasindu@unsw.edu.au)

#### Table of content

1. [Abstract](#abstract)
2. [Related works](#related-works)
3. [Methodology](#methodology)
4. [Experiment Setup and Implementation](#experiment-setup-and-implementation)
5. [Results and Analysis](#results-and-analysis)
6. [Conclusion](#conclusion)
7. [Publications](#publications)
8. [Links](#links)

---


## Abstract

Nanopore sequencing is a technique that is used to real-time analyze long DNA and RNA fragments which is being rapidly adopted in genomics. Monitoring changes in an electric current passing through a protein nanopore (a nanopore is a nano-size pore or cavity) as a nucleic acid and using the resulting signals to identify specific DNA or RNA fragments are the working principles of the Nanopore sequencing. Although it can be used to get real-time data sequencing which provides immediate access to the results, There are challenges in the data processing or the computational analysis side of nanopore sequencing due to the large volume of data and, the amount of computational resources required making the current basecalling implementation that uses GPUs requires few days.

## Related works

There are few areas which have related works on Nanopore sequencing.

* Data compression techniques
* Techniques related to the file format for handling nanopore data
* Machine Learning techniques

1. Impact of lossy compression of nanopore raw signal data on basecalling and consensus accuracy

This rsearch has been focused on the first area in which researchers have explored the use of lossy compression for nanopore raw data using two state-of-the-art lossy time-series compressors, and evaluate the tradeoff between compressed size and basecalling/consensus accuracy. 

According to the conclusion of the research, they have found that lossy compression with existing tools can reduce the compressed size by 35–50% over lossless compression with less than 0.2% percent reduction in basecalling accuracy.

2. Fast nanopore sequencing data analysis with SLOW5

The emergence of nanopore sequencing, enabled by devices from Oxford Nanopore Technologies (ONT), has revolutionized genomics by allowing the sequencing of native DNA and RNA molecules without a theoretical upper limit on read length. However, the large data volumes generated by ONT devices and the computational bottlenecks associated with analyzing the data have posed significant challenges.

Nanopore sequencing data is typically stored in the FAST5 file format, which is based on hierarchical data format 5 (HDF5). However, the FAST5 format lacks efficient parallelization capabilities, leading to slow analysis times. To address this limitation, a new file format called SLOW5 has been introduced. SLOW5 is specifically engineered for efficient parallelization and acceleration of nanopore data analysis.

SLOW5 retains all the information present in the FAST5 format but does not rely on the HDF5 library for file access. It uses a tab-separated values (TSV) file format for encoding metadata and time series signal data for each nanopore read. SLOW5 also includes a binary index file that facilitates parallel
file access. Additionally, SLOW5 can be encoded in a compact binary format called BLOW5, which offers further space savings and supports compression algorithms like zlib and ’vbz’ for efficient storage and parallel access. 

Compared to FAST5, SLOW5 offers several advantages. It is approximately 25% smaller in size, leading to reduced storage requirements. It enables faster data access, as demonstrated by improved read rates compared to FAST5 when using multiple CPU(Central Processing Units) threads. This improved data access translates to significant performance gains in data analysis, particularly for applications like DNA methylation profiling using tools such as Nanopolish/f5c. The runtime for such analyses can be reduced from more than two weeks to approximately 10.5 hours on a high-performance computer, representing a substantial improvement. 

The benefits of SLOW5 extend to different computer architectures, ranging from large high-performance computing systems to smaller devices like portable computers. SLOW5 consistently improves data access and overall execution times across a diverse range of hardware setups. To facilitate the adoption of SLOW5, software tools have been developed for efficient conversion from FAST5 to SLOW5 and for live conversion during a sequencing run. These tools ensure that the transition from FAST5 to SLOW5 is not a barrier and provide users with raw data in the compressed BLOW5 format, resulting in minimal additional workflow time.

The introduction of SLOW5 addresses the inherent limitations of the FAST5 format and provides a scalable framework for efficient analysis of nanopore signal data. The simplicity, efficiency, and open-source nature of SLOW5 encourage active software development in the field of nanopore data analysis,
similar to the impact of the SAM/BAM format in genome informatics

3. Flexible and efcient handling of nanopore sequencing signal data with slow5tools

The study on ’Flexible and efcient handling of nanopore
sequencing signal data with slow5tools’ introduces key
tools and techniques for working with SLOW5 files. slow5lib
and pyslow5 are highlighted as tools for reading and writing SLOW5 files, offering sequential access and easy access in Python, respectively. The study focuses on compression techniques, implementing three schemes in slow5lib: ZLibrary (zlib), Zstandard (zstd), and StreamVByte (svb). These
schemes efficiently compress SLOW5 records and the raw signal field, providing flexibility for users. Additionally, the study discusses slow5tools as a tool for FAST5/SLOW5 conversion,
supporting Unix systems and various C/C++ compilers. The tool utilizes multiprocess and POSIX thread approaches to enhance the conversion process. In summary, the study presents essential tools and techniques, including slow5lib, pyslow5, and slow5tools, for efficient handling of SLOW5 files. These
tools enable sequential access, compression, and conversion, providing flexibility and ease of use for both C and Python programmers.

In the SLOW5 benchmarking experiments, genomic DNA
from the human NA12878 reference sample was sequenced using an ONT PromethION device. The benchmarking was performed on multi-FAST5 files generated by MinKNOW, with
the original FAST5 files compressed using zlib compression.
The experiments excluded single-FAST5 format due to slower
data access and larger file size compared to multi-FAST5
format. The computational benchmarking utilized slow5lib
integrated with f5c v.0.2 CPU version, which employs POSIX
threads for multi-threaded access to FAST5 and SLOW5 files.
Guppy and minimap2 were used to obtain FASTQ and BAM files, respectively. Measurements included overall execution time, CPU utilization percentage, and execution time for individual components.

4. Beyond sequencing: machine learning algorithms extract biology hidden in Nanopore signal data

This review paper has been focused on discussing machine learning applications on nanopore sequencing. Other than sequencing genomes and transcriptomes, this paper discusses on
    
    * extracting biological information from these signals allow the detection of DNA and RNA modifications
    * estimation of poly(A) tail length
    * prediction of RNA secondary structures

Nanopore basecalling is a process in nanopore sequencing
that converts raw ion current signals into a readable sequence
of DNA or RNA bases. During sequencing, as a nucleic acid
molecule passes through a nanopore, changes in ion current
are detected and recorded. Basecalling algorithms analyze
these signals to determine the corresponding sequence of
bases. Due to the noisy nature of the signals and the presence of similar signal ranges for different bases, basecalling can be challenging. However, advancements in basecalling
algorithms, such as using Hidden Markov Models (HMMs)
or Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs), have significantly
improved the accuracy and reliability of nanopore basecalling.
These algorithms help decode the ion current signals and
produce high-quality base sequences, enabling researchers to
study and understand the genetic information contained within
the DNA or RNA molecules.

Early basecalling methods typically achieved an accuracy
of 85% or lower. Since then, significant advancements have
been made in basecalling algorithms to improve nanopore
sequencing accuracy. These improvements have been a driving
force in achieving over 98.3% accuracy in correctly identifying
bases.

A. Hidden Markov model-based basecallers

HMMs are statistical models employed in Computational
Biology to uncover concealed patterns or information from observable sequences, such as nucleotide sequences. Basecallers, like ONT’s Metrichor and Nanocall, utilize HMMs to interpret
the signal data in nanopore sequencing.
HMM basecallers have limitations in predicting sequences
in nanopore sequencing due to their focus on short-range
dependencies between k-mers (contiguous subsequences of
length k which consists of k nucleotides (A, T, C, or G)).
They may not account for long-range dependencies effectively.
Additionally, inaccuracies in the nucleotide sequence model
describing the expected current values of k-mers can introduce
biases in HMM basecallers.

B. RNN based basecallers

To address constraints of Hidden Markov model-based basecallers, basecalling tools like Albacore, nanonetvi, DeepNano, and BasecRAWller utilize a recurrent neural network (RNN)
framework. This approach helps overcome the limitations of
HMM basecallers by leveraging the capabilities of RNNs to
capture and model both short-range and long-range dependencies in the data.

• Unidirectional RNN

Unidirectional RNNs calculate the current hidden state
and the associated probability distribution of bases using
information from the single current input vector and the
prior hidden state. This allows for the prediction of the
next base in the sequence.

• Bidirectional RNN

To enhance the precision of predictions, tools like Albacore, nanonet, and DeepNano employ a bidirectional RNN. This type of RNN incorporates information from
both the past and future states of the ion current input
vector. Although bidirectional RNNs provide improved
accuracy, they can require more time for processing due
to the additional computations involved.

C. Segmentation-free basecallers

Early basecallers rely on a segmentation process to determine segment boundaries based on abrupt signal changes. However, this segmentation approach is prone to errors due to
variable translocation speeds and noisy signals. To overcome
these challenges, segmentation-free basecallers have been developed, such as ONT’s Albacore version 2.0.1v and the open source software Chiron. Chiron takes a different approach by
combining a convolutional neural network (CNN) to extract
signal features and a recurrent neural network (RNN) to predict nucleotide probabilities. It further employs a connectionist temporal classification (CTC) decoder, which selects the base
with the highest probability at each position and maps them
together to form the final complete sequence. By eliminating
the need for segmentation, Chiron improves the accuracy and
efficiency of basecalling in nanopore sequencing.

## Methodology

## Experiment Setup and Implementation

## Results and Analysis

## Conclusion

## Publications
## Publications
[//]: # "Note: Uncomment each once you uploaded the files to the repository"

1. [Semester 7 report](https://www.overleaf.com/read/xrxwntnvjvzw)
2. [Semester 7 slides]()
3. [Semester 8 report]() 
4. [Semester 8 slides]()
5. [Semester 8 3MT slides]()
<!-- 5. Author 1, Author 2 and Author 3 "Research paper title" (2021). [PDF](./). -->



## Links

[//]: # ( NOTE: EDIT THIS LINKS WITH YOUR REPO DETAILS )

- [Project Repository](https://github.com/cepdnaclk/e17-4yp-Acceleration-of-deep-neural-network-based-nanopore-super-accuracy-basecalling)
- [Project Page](https://cepdnaclk.github.io/e17-4yp-Acceleration-of-deep-neural-network-based-nanopore-super-accuracy-basecalling)
- [Department of Computer Engineering](http://www.ce.pdn.ac.lk/)
- [University of Peradeniya](https://eng.pdn.ac.lk/)

[//]: # "Please refer this to learn more about Markdown syntax"
[//]: # "https://github.com/adam-p/markdown-here/wiki/Markdown-Cheatsheet"
